# data_512_Final_Project
Repository for Human Centered Design Final Project

This repository was created as part of a Data Science course at the University of Washington. You can find a link to the course outline at https://wiki.communitydata.cc/Human_Centered_Data_Science_(Fall_2018).

# Items in this repository:
* **Final Project.ipynb**: This notebook contains all the process and code to perform this research
* **images folder**: This is a file folder of all plots I generated while performing my analysis saved as .png files
* **sample_library_collection.csv**: Since the full dataset I used was very large (6.1 GB), I have provided a sample of the first 10,000 rows of data. **The data I used for my full analysis was from Sept 2017 to Oct 2018**. For licencing information see ** The Data** section below.
* **sample_checkouts_by_title.csv** Since the full datast I used was very large (6.8 GB), I have provided a sample of the first 10,000 rows of data. **My full analysis used data from April 2005 to Oct 2018**. For licencing information see ** The Data** section below.
* **Integrated Library Systems (ILS) Data Dictionary.csv**: This is the entier Data dictionary used to decifer codes like Item Locoation, Item Type, etc. This is the most recent update (updated for 2018). For licencing information see ** The Data** section below.

# Introduction
The Seattle public library has 27 locations (list of locations can be found at https://www.spl.org/hours-and-locations). I would like to investigate the usage of the Seattle Public Library inventory. I am interested in seeing if I can find any insites to the checkout patterns of the inventory and the locations, and if any suggestions can be made to the library about their inventory. 

Through my analysis, I would like to answer the following questions: 
*   Is there a trend in digital material checkouts over printed material checkouts? I assume that there will be an increase in digital materials over time with the introduction of e-materials and e-readers.
*	Is there a correlation between library location and printed material checkout numbers over time? I believe that there will be a correlation between the location and the physical checkouts over time. 
*	Is there a correlation between “floating” material and checkout counts over time? I believe that there will some trends in these numbers. Floating material are items that can be checked out at one location and returned to another location. These items are also subject to move between locations to re-destribute the inventory between branches.
*	Are there any interesting trends in the types of items being checked out? I believe that books will likely be the highest checked out item at the library. Libraries have a large selection of items, but I believe most people will check out books from libraries rather than movies or some other item. 

# The Data
The data I am using is collected and shared by the City of Seattle through their Open Data Program. This program makes data generated by the City of Seattle avialible to the public. For more information about the Open Data Program, please visit http://www.seattle.gov/tech/initiatives/open-data/about-the-open-data-program. 

All the data release through the Open Data program is unlicensed per the Open Data Policy:

**Datasets on the Open Data Portal shall be made available without registration requirement, license requirement or restrictions on their use provided that the department may require a third party providing to the public any public data set, or application utilizing 
such data set, to explicitly identify the source and version of the public data set, and a description of any modifications made to such public data set.**

For the entier Open Data Policy, please see http://www.seattle.gov/Documents/Departments/SeattleGovPortals/CityServices/OpenDataPolicyV1.pdf which can be found on the on this webpage under "Supporting Documentatin" as "Open Data Policy" on this webpage: http://www.seattle.gov/tech/initiatives/open-data/about-the-open-data-program

There are three datasets collected and maintained by the Seattle Public Library. I use all three to perform my analysis. These datasetts are: **Checkouts by Title**, **Library Collection Inventory** and **Integrated Library Systems (ILS) Data Dictionary**. These datasets are released under a public license.

## Checkouts by Title:
This dataset is the monthly count of checkout titles starting in April 2005. This dataset includes printed and electronic versions of titles and their checkout counts aggregated by month. This data is updated monthly and publicly licensed. 

Here is the location to gather the data: https://data.seattle.gov/Community/Checkouts-by-Title/tmmm-ytt6

More information about this data set can be found in the Frequently Asked Questions PDF that can be found on the webpage above. I have provided a link for convince to the PDF here: https://data.seattle.gov/api/views/tmmm-ytt6/files/d37b9edc-c56f-46e4-aaea-cb882230cf3a?download=true&filename=Checkouts%20by%20Title%20FAQs.pdf

This data has 11 columns and 32.3 million rows. The columns are below:
+ UsageClass
+	CheckoutType
+	MaterialType
+	CheckoutYear
+	CheckoutMonth
+	Checkouts
+	Title
+	Creator
+	Subjects
+   Publisher
+   PublicationYear

## Library Collection Inventory:
This dataset is the library inventory for the entire Seattle Public Library Collection. This data is refreshed monthly starting September 1, 2017 (last updated Nov 6, 2018) and is publicly licensed. Each month appends that month’s inventory, it does not overwrite the previous months inventory.

Here is the location to gather the data: https://data.seattle.gov/Community/Library-Collection-Inventory/6vkj-f5xf

More information about this data set can be found in the Frequently Asked Questions PDF that can be found on the webpage above. I have provided a link for convince to the PDF here: https://data.seattle.gov/api/views/6vkj-f5xf/files/857144b6-5761-4ab4-81be-d36a3287a5cc?download=true&filename=Library%20Collection%20Inventory%20FAQs.pdf

The data has 13 columns and 20.2 million rows. The columns are: 
+	BibNum
+	Title
+	Author
+	ISBN
+	PublicationYear
+	Publisher
+	Subjects
+	ItemType
+	ItemCollection
+	FloatingItem
+	ItemLocation
+	ReportDate
+	ItemCount

## Integrated Library Systems (ILS) Data Dictionary:
This dataset contains the list of codes used in the Seattle Public Library’s datasets to categorize the titles. This data is updated yearly starting September 1, 2017 (last updated Nov 14, 2018), and is publicly licensed. 

Here is the location to gather the data: https://data.seattle.gov/Community/Integrated-Library-System-ILS-Data-Dictionary/pbt3-ytbc

The data has 7 columns and 571 rows. The columns are: 
+	Code
+	Description
+	Code Type
+	Format Group
+	Format Subgroup 
+	Category Group
+	Category Subgroup

## Data Collection
For my analysis, I **downloaded the entier dataset** to .csv files. However, you could use the API provided on each dataset page I provided above. 

Each dataset has an API and the documentation can be found at:
* Checkouts by Title https://dev.socrata.com/foundry/data.seattle.gov/tjb6-zsmc
* Library Collection Inventory: https://dev.socrata.com/foundry/data.seattle.gov/d4ej-xh6a
* Integrated Library Systems (ILS) Data Dictionary: https://dev.socrata.com/foundry/data.seattle.gov/tjb6-zsmc

These APIs are licensed under [CC BY-NC-SA 3.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)

# Discussion
## Human Centered Design Concepts
The data collected is on book checkout patterns by humans who use the Seattle Public Library as a resource, and therefore the data collected, as well as any analysis on that data will have human impacts. A major use for this analysis could be used to inform changes in the availability of certain titles to different branch locations or material types. This could result in increased or decreases the access to the libraries inventory types (digital materal, pysical material) or could change the access based on the branch location. This could have large human impacts on a resource that ideally are equally accessable by all.

## Limitations
One of the major concerns/limitations to this analysis is the assumption of universal access to the library and its resources.
This data assumes that everyone has access to the library locations or its electronic material, however that is not necessarily true. 
Below are the requirements to get a free library card and can be found on the Seattle Public Library website. 

**Everyone who lives, works, goes to school or owns property in King County (except Yarrow Point and Hunts Point) can get a free Library card. Apply online, then visit any Library location to pick up your card.**

The quote above can be found on the Seattle Public Library's website as well as other requriments to obtain a library card. The link for this can be found here: https://www.spl.org/using-the-library/get-started/get-started-with-a-library-card.

You must also show a valid photo ID and something that proves you meet the above requirements. This is broad list of people eligible to receive a free library card, however if you do not meet these requirements, there is a fee to get a library card. This means there is a portion of people who might not be able to get a library card due to the financial burden of not being able to prove they meet the requirements laid out by the Seattle Public Library.

Another limitation to the data collected is the availability of transportation to a physical location. If a person wants to check out a specific title that is only at a specific location, the ability to travel to that branch might not be available. Convenient public transportation, limitations in parking locations, and ability go during the hours of operations can be challenging for some and can skew the data that the library collects. 

Another limitation to the data collected is access to printed materials and electronic material can be limited. For the printed material, the number of printed copies might hinder your ability to check out the title. In the case of electronic material, access to an e-reader, computer or reliable internet connection can hinder some from checking out electronic material (i.e.  e-readers, computers and reliable internet connection require the ability to pay for these objects and services).

## Future Work
By performing this analysis, I have come up with additional research questions that I did not have time to explore but I think could be informative. I will list them out.

* an analysis on checkouts by material type (i.e, book, e-book, video casset, DVD, etc.)
* an analysis on the impacts of inventory levels for material checkouts
* an analysis on how inventory gets allocationed to each branch
* an anlaysis on how floating inventory get decided and allocated to each branch
* an analysis on access to each branch location (public transit, parking, which neighborhoods the branches are in)

# Conclusion

In conclusion, I would like to perform additional analysis before I can draw any informative suggestions about the Seattle public library. As I was performing my analysis, more questions and interactions between variables arose. However, I can provide some general things to note for each of my research questions.


## Is there a trend in digital material checkouts over printed material checkouts? 
The answer to this question is yes, there are some trends to note in the checkouts by digital and physical material. From about 2012 onward, there looks to be a steady number of total checkouts. In addition, there has been a steady increase of digital material checkouts, and a steady decrease of physical checkouts. Since I did not perform a detailed study on the inventory. A more detialed study on inventory levels of each of these should be done to determine if any changes to invnetory would be benificial. 
## Is there a correlation between library location and printed material checkout numbers over time?  
Based on the analysis I performed there seems to be a large correlation between branch location and physical materail checkouts. However, I believe that the inventory levels of each branch plays a huge role in this. Since I did not perform an analysis on the effects of inventory levels I can not confirm this. However, from the visualizations I produced, it looks like the locations with the highest inventory saw the highest checkouts. This can be demonstrated by the Centeral Location having the highest inventory of physical materials and also the highest checkouts of those materials. One could normalize this data by using the average checkouts by title at each locaiton and see if any thing pops out. I believe inventory levels also play a role in this answer because the Lake City branch had a decline in checkouts of their physical materal around the same time as the branches physical material inventory was reduced.
## Is there a correlation between “floating” material and checkout counts over time? I
The answer to this questions is yes, it seems to follow the same paterns as the physical material checkouts, but more detialed analysis would be needed to answer difinitivly. The branches that had the largest floating inventory, saw the highest checkouts of that material. An interesting follow-on would be to see if you could track the floating inventory patters and see if that has an effect on checkout patersn.
## Are there any interesting trends in the types of items being checked out?
Since there is only a small sample size, it is difficult to see any trends or changes. For the most part, the highest checked out items for 2017 was the same for 2018, and the most checked out item types were also the item types with the larges inventory.
